We use some of James Gunn's material too from that, you know, the movie things
he has from his Kansas, what is it that, oh, I forget what it is. He's got a
center there for science studies. I know he did sort of what Williamson did,
gave his collection to the university, served as a nucleus for a, and then. He
rents some of their little half hour things. Testing 1, 2, testing. For the
class, I mean, not for the show, obviously. Uh-huh. Yeah, he's... Yeah, I
understand he has a whole bunch of them. I think I did one years ago just to
make sure... Five-minute spot type thing. Right.
Okay, good.
Good place for it. Hey, would it help you if I took the stuff off the chair? Put
that over there. No, that's fine. That's fine. We're doing fine, man. Yeah. our
studio your office is very neat compared to our studio I clean it about once a
year you know we have a cleaning lady comes in here periodically but I never let
her in my office keep her in the rest of the house and she cleans it I'll never
be able to find anything same with me Darryl you want to go ahead and lead off
yeah or David can you do you have something to start with no go ahead okay um
Mr. Zolasny first of all we'd like to talk a little bit about your origins in
the science-fiction writer When you began writing, did you plan on being a
science fiction writer, or had you considered mainstream writing? Well, it's a
funny thing. I was
originally a reader of science fiction from about the age of 11 on through high
school. And during that period, I did write a lot of science fiction stories,
which I tried to sell, but I was like my early teens. And I didn't really meet
with any success at that point. and I decided actually before that, that I
wanted to be a writer. I wasn't, it wasn't necessarily science fiction that I
had in mind, though it was science fiction stories that I was writing during the
period I was reading them. When I went to college, I stopped reading science
fiction, just to concentrate on the material I had there, and I wrote poetry
actually exclusively. I decided that I was going to start writing again as soon
as I got out of college and had some time. And at that point, I wasn't
absolutely certain what it was that I would try writing. But when the
opportunity finally presented itself in early 1962,
I decided it might be easier for me to break into science fiction since I had
read so much of it in the past and knew the area. So I decided I'd try there
first, and I went out and re-familiarized myself with science fiction. And then
I began writing and submitting the stories. And after about six or seven weeks,
I sold my first one. And I sold 16 others that year. So I stayed with it. And
that's been over 18 years now. So that's how I got in. I'm happy I did. that if
I had an idea for what I thought was a nice story or something that was not
science fiction, I wouldn't hesitate to write it, but I've gotten a certain
habit of mind from it over the years so that usually I do tend to translate
everything into science fiction. Have you written any mainstream material at all
that's been published? I have had a book of poetry published. But that's really
the only non-science fiction material I've had. In other words, you did make a
conscious decision to become a writer and show science fiction as the genre or
the form that you've worked on. The decision to be a writer came first a long
time ago, and science fiction was the point of attack for selling. So they were,
in a way, two separate decisions. But, yeah, it was a conscious decision. just
one more question i have on your origins
what in your background say your college background or your interests or
anything would have influenced the kind of science fiction you write were there
any particular studies or areas that you were interested in that maybe formed
your style or your ideas the way you approached the writing in science fiction
oh that's a really difficult one i i don't know So my intention was to take a
graduate degree and teach while writing on the side. As things fell out, I wound
up with a government job and never did use my graduate degree. But as an
undergraduate, I was a psychology major. And I decided I did not really want to
work as a psychologist. and it occurred to me somewhere along the line that if I
were simply going to be teaching and writing with the aim in mind of eventually
writing full-time, I might as well teach something that would be a little more
fun than psychology, so I switched to English and took my graduate work in
English and comparative literature. There were a number of science courses as
electives and so forth. I have read an awful lot in the sciences, both during
and since college.
I don't really know what particular area might have influenced my habits of mind
that much. I read fairly widely.
as I said it's a difficult question it's hard to say I was thinking specifically
say your comparative literature background is that where you oh I guess get your
background in mythology, legend well my thesis was actually a thing involving
the Elizabethan and Jacobean theatre but I had always I read mythology before I
read science fiction back before I started reading science fiction when I was 11
I didn't discover it until that point. Before then I had always liked things of
a rather fabulous nature, so I read a lot of mythology and I never stopped
reading it. As I grew older, my tastes got a little more sophisticated and I
became a little more interested in the backgrounds and origins of these things.
I went into comparative religions and anthropology just as a personal interest.
This wasn't really the subject of any academic pursuit, per se. When you first
started, or at least about the time that you first started writing science
fiction, or at least getting it published, was the same time that a new style of
writing was becoming predominant, the new wave.
in some of our talks with other science fiction writers they've named you as one
of the people in the vanguard of the New Wave What is your reaction to the New
Wave style of writing and how it came about? Oh, well, it's a different thing
when you're right there because when I began in the early 60s I wasn't
consciously attempting to react against anything that had gone before by virtue
of hindsight now, the new wave probably is best defined as a kind of reaction to
the earlier science fiction story where there was less emphasis on
characterization where the writing was a fairly nuts and bolts type prose where
a stream of consciousness was something that was never used. Well, all of the
impressionistic and expressionistic writing tricks that appeared in, say,
Michael Moorcock's New Worlds or some of the things some of the writers, such as
Delaney and Dish, were doing who came on the scene at about the same time I did.
um to me none of this was um invoked as a uh as a kind of reaction to the hard
science story um or the extrapolative story and um as i say looking back on it
now i was simply um telling the only sort of story i knew how to tell at that
time and I wasn't thinking of it in context in terms of the other things that
were going on I was just purely exercising tunnel vision and writing this sort
of story I felt I was able to write I suppose having grown up on the earlier
sort of science fiction, the space opera sort of thing of the 30s and 40s too
and the harder science stories of the 40s and some of the sociological science
fiction of the 50s. And having a background in literature,
there's a natural tendency, whether it's conscious or not, to want to do
something different than things that had gone before.
And also just a personal idiosyncrasy. in longer pieces of writing I tend to
think of this thing in terms of character usually when I'm normally I get the
idea for the characters before I work out a plot or even conceive of the setting
as a consequence my stories well the first ones were basically gimmick stories
because it was the easiest way to break in and it was about all that I was
capable of doing at the time. But when I began writing at greater length and
when I was a bit sure of myself, I would think of the characters first. So the
stories tended to have more, I suppose, in the way of psychological motivation
rather than just external characterization.
And my writing itself, possibly because of the years I'd spent writing poetry
and reading general literature tended to be a bit different from some of the
earlier things which were kind of journalistic in character.
But I wasn't really aware of this at the time, and there was no conscious revolt
against things which had gone before. It was just a new type of story, which was
being written at the time, which by virtue of, was redundant, I'll take this
out.
Well, it's kind of funny, too, because I think the first story for which I
became known was a piece called A Rose for Ecclesiastes.
and one of my reasons in writing this is because I was very fond of the earlier
space operas and things like this where they played John Carter of Mars and I
had always wanted to do something set on the Mars which existed in these earlier
stories and I knew at the time I wrote it that it was scientifically impossible
at that point we already knew enough about Mars to know that the temperature was
not the same as I had it in the story, that the atmosphere was not the same, and
so forth. But it was close enough to the point where this knowledge was just
becoming current that I could still get away with doing a thing like that. So I
intentionally wrote that and wrote it in the fashion I did. Oh, it was a kind of
exercise in nostalgia on my part. and I'd always wanted to do a story set on
that kind of Mars, and I knew that if I waited another year or so I wouldn't be
able to. The same with Venus for my story, The Doors of His Face, The Lamps of
His Mouth. At that point we already were aware that the surface temperature was
about 900 degrees, but still there were these, there was this whole traditional
body of science fiction literature which had a vast watery world. Misty and so
forth that I really had wanted to use at least once in my life so I did those
two stories as a kind of tribute to the earlier things but then again I wrote
them the way I was writing then rather than in the older style so that they
reading them now they have to be regarded as fantasy rather than science fiction
because science has already demonstrated that those circumstances don't prevail
So in a sense, I'm a traditionalist, or at least I'm very fond of the traditions
science fiction possesses. On the other hand, I like to think of myself as a
realist, and I do make a distinction, which I hope my readers make between the
pieces I'm writing, which have a fantasy basis, and the ones I'm writing which
are nearer the science fiction side of the spectrum. I was going to ask if you
yourself recognized a dual type of style in your writing. I've noticed it seems
some stories that are more of a fantasy and new wave, if you will, nature and
some that are more of a science fictional nature. Oh yeah. I do make the
distinction myself in a science fiction story everything I feel should be
explainable in terms of natural laws or extensions of natural laws as we
understand them now whereas in a fantasy story it's part of the rules of the
game so I feel there are no compunctions against invoking the supernatural or
bringing in magic and things of that sort.
So basically a science fiction story, things are ultimately explainable in a
fantasy story. They're explainable, really, in terms of something that isn't
explainable. So you've got the less
rational background if you push things far enough in a fantasy story. As long as
we're on that topic, maybe we can talk a little bit about one of your books that
we admire very much, The Jack of Shadows. How would you classify that? Science
or science fiction? I would have to call it science fantasy.
I suppose to extend my answer to the previous question a bit further, I also
believe in mixing the two. uh well
Lord of Light for instance was a book which where I intentionally wrote it to be
taken two ways a fantasy uh fan could uh read it as a piece of fantasy whereas a
science fiction fan also had options available to him any single item which
occurs in there um which is of an unusual nature is there's ultimately an
explanation available for it if the person cares to use it. If he doesn't,
that's fine, too. I also tried to write that book in something more of a fantasy
style. The sentences are longer and a bit more convoluted, and there's more
figurative language in that book than in some of my others. With Jack of
Shadows, I did intentionally want to try to marry a fantasy idea and a science
fiction idea.
I will do such things again if it occurs to me. Notice the same thing in
Changeling too. Mixture there of science and magic. Yeah. Yes, that's of course
there. Yeah, I use the out of the parallel worlds, of course, But still that's
the case. In Jack of Shadows, when the story changes from that of the fantasy
world to the really abrupt change to that of the highly technological side of
the world, when I was reading that it was almost as if somebody spliced down the
middle of the book and all of a sudden here's a different book. It was a
marvelous device used to change the reference point of the person who was
reading. Thank you.
Obviously, you did that intentionally. But let
me rethink my question up here.
was that just kind of a fun writer's trick to do because you knew the person was
going to be reading along there and all of a sudden hit this certain portion
well yes it was fun I suppose
yeah the first thing I thought of when I had the idea for that book actually was
an image of that world half in light and half in darkness and then the character
and And for a long time I just thought about the character and the plot pretty
much unfolded itself.
I have a question on Jack of Shadows too. I'm not sure how you react to these.
Most authors that I've spoken with or read, when they're writing about their own
work, are kind of reluctant to talk about what they mean by something, you know,
in terms of theme or intention and so forth. Or my question was going to be, oh,
I notice in many of your works you deal with opposites. I guess a writer can't
help, you know, light, dark, science, magic, and so forth. Right. And in a lot
of cases, I think you talk about a reconciliation. Now, in The Jack of Shadows,
when Jack allows his soul to enter him and he's destroyed the machine at the
center of the world, which keeps the world from spinning. Are you saying that
science and magic need to be reconciled, that they can be, they should be, or is
that just a device to hang a story on?
I did look at it as a kind of reconciliation, not necessarily between science
and magic per se, but science and magic themselves almost being taken as
symbolic of the light and the dark and everything. I mean, magic does not
necessarily have to be magic. It can represent the dark side of the human mind,
the unconscious, and so forth, as opposed to the rational, logical.
I'll go that far. Looking at reconciliation there. And one more question, on the
end of that book, at the end. When Morningstar reaches down for Jack I'm certain
you meant that to be, for a reader to take that however he wanted to. Is he
going to catch Jack, and so forth? I took it as that Jack is now in some sense a
whole man. He's reconciled light and dark, he's gotten his soul, and Morningstar
would be sort of the beginning of a new day, the Morningstar. That there's a
reconciliation that he's going to be saved, and the Morningstar would catch him
would that be in misreading no okay um i've noticed um you mentioned earlier
about how you enjoyed reading mythology and you do seem to incorporate a lot of
mythology in your work uh or at least uh sometimes some of it seems to appear
pseudo-mythology and some of it follows uh traditional mythology yeah um
and I did that more in my earlier writings than I did in recent years because
there came a point where whenever I would attend a science fiction convention or
any sort of get-together, I'd usually be asked to appear on a panel with a title
like Mythology and Science Fiction, And I started to feel at that point that I
was being typecast as a writer of mythological science fiction, so I
intentionally abandoned it for a time and wrote things such as Doorways in the
Sand. Today we choose Faces, which do not really contain any overt references to
specific mythologies.
This is not to say that I have abandoned it entirely, I did want to get away
from it for a time though to show that I could write other sorts of things.
In fact, now that I have done so, I doubtless go back and try a few more things
using mythology, perhaps in a different fashion than I have in the past, or some
combination of mythology and something else, because I do have a certain
fondness for this sort of material. You mentioned The Lord of Light a little bit
earlier. I'm not that familiar with the Hindu or Buddhist mythology. Was that a
retelling of a Hindu myth, or did you simply use the names and the structure and
put your own details into it? Both, in a way. There are bits and pieces and
excerpts there from a great number of different elements in Hinduism. It's one
of, religion is one of these vast bodies of material where they, in a way, never
really discarded anything, just kept adding so that it grew to quite sizable
proportions over the centuries, so that it's kind of a vast mine of materials.
And I took the elements that were most suitable for the story I wanted to tell.
However, I did use the historical instance there of the situation involving the
development of Buddhism itself as a reaction really to the earlier religion of
the Brahmins and thought that it would be interesting to in a way follow that
course by having my character who intended to rebel against a situation similar
to that in old India do so by similar means, by setting up Buddhism as a
reaction
to it. So there's that element, and then the various trappings of the stories
themselves do have their sources, but there is no one consecutive linear
narrative that parallels Lord of Light.
Would you consider yourself a fan of pure fantasy, like the works of Tolkien and
so forth? Oh, yes. I read both. It varies from day to day, but my mood is what I
most like. I mean, say, Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays so I like a fantasy and
Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday is science fiction. Sunday is a day of rest.
But no, I read both. I like both.
My own reading pleasure. It doesn't matter that much.
let's talk about Amber for a while we're all great fans of your Amber series too
I wonder first of all how you got involved in such an extended narrative was
that in terms of the serialization of it it kept going or was it something you
planned to be five volumes from the start well no I had no idea how long it was
going to be when I started it I didn't even know what the story was about when I
started I have two ways of composing a book One is when I'm in a hurry, I will
outline and follow. And I can write fairly quickly. I never follow an outline
point for point. I always depart from it. But if I have an outline, I can
proceed pretty quickly. The other method is when I have more time on my hands, I
am willing to start writing a story with a main character and a couple incidents
in mind with about 10% or 15% of a story. and Nine Princes in Amber was such a
thing. I thought of Corwin, I thought of that opening situation and I thought, I
won't go any further in working it out, I'll just start writing. And the story
really told itself for about the first quarter or third of the book before I
reached a point where I asked myself where I was going. And at that point I had
enough material and material from what had gone before so that I could push the
book along farther. And I realized somewhere after that that it was going to
have to be more than one book. The economics of the situation in those days were
that a writer
would be better off financially doing several shorter books than one long one,
just in terms of the advances and so forth. So I ended Nine Princes of Amber
where I did, and immediately began work on the second book, for which I did not
have a title at that point. I wrote about a quarter of it before I stopped and
went on and wrote other things. I sold Nine Princes of Amber, and it wasn't
until a few years later when I needed another book to fulfill an open contract
with Doubleday that I took the quarter of the second book I had written, sat
down and thought about it more carefully, I saw that it was going to have to be
more than just a second book, wrote it, send it in. At that point, I had more in
the way of an idea as to where the total action was headed, but I still did not
know how many books would be involved. I thought at some point that I might be
able to wind it up as a trilogy, and at others, I saw half a dozen or so. So I'd
even toyed with the idea of telling it from different characters' points of view
rather than just following Corwin. But I was going to try a sort of Alexandria
Quartet thing where I told the same story over several times but colored by
various characters' points of view and only advancing it slightly.
For that sort of story, though, it didn't seem the best thing, and the only
thing that survived of that in the series itself was The Automobile Accident, to
which I kept returning and re-explaining and redefining as more things came to
light.
When I finished the third book, I still thought possibly I could wind it up in
four.
But obviously, since you've read them, it took five.
so that, that was one of the books I sort of call a free association novel as
opposed to an outlined novel is it finished at five or is there possibly a sixth
one on the horizon? there is possibly a sixth one I have made no commitments, I
do not have a plot but I've been talking about it and thinking about it a
publisher
and it is possible when I get a few things out of the way that I'm writing now
that I might go on and do a sixth one but so far as the five books that now
exist are concerned that story is told that was the story I had in mind anything
which would continue the series would probably take off in a new direction it
could possibly be from another character's point of view
well as I said I don't have a story in mind so I won't speculate myself yeah I
felt like there were still a few unanswered questions particularly in terms of
the patterns that were now conflicting do I understand that correctly that the
original pattern was reconstructed yes so there are now two patterns side by
side and we don't know what the interference or compatibility of those are.
Right. Right. That's what made me think there might possibly be another one on
the future. Hang on here. We might do a little explanation on those patterns.
Some of the people might not know what that means. Mm-hmm.
Could you explain a little bit about what the patterns are that they walk in
amber? Oh, they're a kind of central image to this series of books. It is a kind
of archetypal design which exists in the real world. Amber of which our own
earth and a great variety of shadings and variations thereof exist. Amber is the
real world, earth, and the others are referred to as shadows, are shadow in the
stories. is the background, the basis of reality in Amber is this design called
the pattern, which was inscribed by an ancestor of the clan about whom the story
is told. Only a person of the blood of the royal family of Amber is able to walk
this pattern and not be destroyed by it. And in the course of walking the
pattern, at some point in his early life, the Amberite acquires the ability to
walk through the various shadow worlds, which surround Amber, so that he can
travel through an infinity of possibilities to virtually any world he desires.
if the pattern itself were destroyed it would in a sense be the end of the world
this is this does figure in the narrative itself
in a sense that's a heroic fantasy in some ways isn't it Corwin is a swordsman
he's fighting for the throne magic works. It's in the tradition of heroic
fantasy. Yes, I would say whenever I try anything of this sort, I try to give it
an extra twist is what it is. Basically, I look at it myself as a kind of heroic
fantasy with a few variations that don't usually occur in that sort of
literature.
Do you have a large fan following that keeps you going on some of these
projects? Oh, I do get letters
saying whether they liked or disliked something and came out and asking what I
have coming out and what I might be engaged in writing at the moment. Yeah,
there are a number of people. What's the reaction to Amber been from readers? I
have gotten more fan letters on the Amber books than anything else I've ever
written. There was a period of a couple of years that I was getting several
letters a week on the Amber books. So they've sold well, too, in other words.
The publishers would be interested in a continuation, perhaps, for that reason.
Yeah. About a million copies of all five Amber books. And a great number of
foreign editions, too.
We'll have a whole
box full. No, we've got tons of tape, we can sit here all day We won't, we won't
another book I enjoyed very much is this immortal oh yes was that called call me
conrad yes that was my first novel and call me conrad was my title and the title
under which it appeared in when it was originally serialized in the magazine of
fantasy and science fiction and it was that shorter version of it which received
the Hugo that following year and when it was sold to Ace they're the ones who
applied the shorter title they like pithy things which are obviously identified
as science fiction or fantasy Was that your most extensive use of Greek myth as
a background? Yes I wondered how much you molded that on the Greeks For
instance, Conrad himself I'm not sure I'm saying this word correctly, but it was
the Calacanzaroi? Oh, yeah. Is that an actual— Calacanzar—yeah, you will—this is
a kind of survival of Pan and the satyr figures,
which I first encountered, actually, in the early
writings of Lawrence Durell, his travels in the Greek aisles in Prospero's cell
and reflections on a marine Venus. He was referring to the various peasant
superstitions and what have you, which still exist in the Greek isles in the 30s
when he was living there. And the Calaconseros figure cropped up and it went
into a bit of an explanation. And that sort of remained with me. And when I
wrote this book, it just occurred to me as might be appropriate.
I wonder why you'd use that particular figure, though, as sort of Conrad seems
to me as sort of the savior of Earth, if you want to put it that way. In fact,
he gets sort of the administratorship of it at the end of the book and he works
to retain the history and the past of earth I wonder why that figure would be
appropriate for such a function I mean more of a godlike figure to me it would
seem to be more
well in a sense that that figure is a survival from a much earlier time and so
is he it is
there is also a Dionysiac element in uh Conrad which this represents um he is
not a completely I might as well go ahead and keep using Nietzsche's terminology
not completely an Apollonian figure he had been a uh a revolutionary at one
point he uh while he's preserving the earth Now, there had been a point when he
had been blowing up cities and assassinating people. He has intended to be a
complex character with both these elements in him. At this moment in his life,
he is having a role forced upon him where he is ultimately going to be the
rational, the figure representing order, but he had not always been so. And the
Cala Canzaros was a representative of the other part of his personality in which
we first meet him. I don't know if that completely answers your question. I have
one more question on it. I had one more question on that. I was just a little
uncertain about his origins. At one point I thought that he had originated he
had been left on a hillside had a club foot like Oedipus in some ways. I had the
impression that he had originated after that war. And on the other hand, he
seems to go back further than that, way back. Was there a point in the book
where you had specified his origins or was that meant to be a little ambiguous?
It was meant to be a bit ambiguous.
But he was almost or in essence immortal. Yes.
On the topic of immortality are very long-lived characters many of your
characters in your stories are very long live uh how why is it that you use this
device um because i feel comfortable with and enjoy writing about characters who
have vast body of experience to draw upon who are very conversant in a great
number of uh, areas of history and literature and the sciences. Um, uh, this
sort of
highly developed, uh, intellect though is generally the product of, great number
of years in the cultivation. And, um, if I were to use a character, say, in his,
at the, the age of person would normally, acquire that sort of background he'd
be too feeble to engage in the activities most of my characters have to engage
in if the basis were a normal human lifespan we use today uh I got around that
in doorways in the sand by making my protagonist the person who had been an
undergraduate actively taking of courses full-time for about 13 years so that
while he was still young enough to climb buildings he had at a sort of force-fed
rate acquired the the kind of sensibility
I wanted him to possess but in a way it's a it is a trick for matching a
sufficiently young physique with a sufficiently large intellect.
I notice in Corwin and in Jack and Jack O'Shadows a lot of similarities in some
of the main characters and I'm wondering if you put a lot of your own self into
some of these protagonists if maybe they're kind of an alter ego for you or
something like that. oh I suppose it's unavoidable to I mean you can't help but
put something of yourself into anything you write even if it's even if you're
trying to be completely objective well
so to an extent I am present in all of my characters to what degree though I am
not absolutely certain I mean I have written stories with characters of whom
I'm not particularly fond. On the other hand, no one is completely satisfied
with himself. Yes, to some extent, I am there. I would even say is that I'm not
sure you'd agree with this or not, but I would say there's almost a typical
Zelazny hero, almost like a Hemingway hero. Sometimes he's immortal, usually a
loner, highly literate, sophisticated, knowledgeable, able. I find that in many
of your stories. Maybe sort of a cynicism, too, about going along with the
sophistication. Yes, it's hard to get away from that, I guess. It may be an
example of something Gore Vidal once said, the effect that every author has a
certain cast of characters, like a stock company, and they play different roles
in different stories, but he only has a limited number of people he can
introduce at different ages. And on the other hand, I don't like thinking
that... I think there is some truth in this, but I also think that hopefully,
just by virtue of the fact that people do change, one can add a few more
characters here and there over the years to the company and bring about further
development than the ones who are resident players.
But to answer your question simply, I'd say yes, you're probably right. Just as
sort of a postscript to that, the Isle of the Dead, Francis Sandoff, I thought
you must have had a lot of fun constructing him. He, to me, has many of the
elements that I see in your fiction and other characters all sort of drawn
together. He has almost an ideal job, unlimited funds, you know, near
immortality, highly sophisticated, literate, all of that. I think there must
have been a lot of yourself going into that kind of a construction.
i was very happy with that book yes i i enjoyed him as a character was that was
that an actual mythology you were working with her when you made up the uh what
was the shimbel the shaker of thunder yes he became a god in fact he was a god
too when you come right down was that one that you constructed yourself yes yes
if there are any parallels they were unintentional um uh mythology being what it
is i'm sure someone can find parallels somewhere but but no it was nothing not
by design it was uh are
we still rolling deep how much we have left uh i was mistaken we had a lot more
than eight minutes before i'm seeing a reflection we have about five minutes on
there now well
okay let me ask another question along with us Tommy Gallinger, the rose for
Ecclesiastes. Yes. In many ways he's the same as some of these other characters,
except, of course, he's not immortal. But he has more of a, I'm not sure this is
the right word to use, but I would almost say a bitterness about him. He
actually, I guess, saves the remnants of the Martian culture. He teaches,
inspires them to want to continue to exist. But himself, he tries to commit
suicide at the end. did his bitterness come because he himself is lacking
something that he can give to others but yet he doesn't have himself. I'm not
sure that's an awkward question or not. But... There was a bitterness about him.
Yes, yes there was. And... he is not completely typical. So if we're talking
about typical it's a last new character.
it is hard to go back and recall everything that went into him. But, yeah,
certainly there was more in the way of bitterness. But he's very positive in
that he saves the remnants of the Martian culture. He goes out of his way and,
you know, extends himself greatly to have them to continue to exist. He gives
them something. Gives them the rose. He shows them that they can still be
fertile, that there's a reason to continue to live, but yet he doesn't want to.
I don't know, maybe that's true life. I'm not sure. He seemed to have a
positive... The results of his actions were very positive, but yet himself, he
seems to be a negative personality in terms of his own life. In some ways, yes.
Well,
he's a complex character. There's not too much more I can say about him, though.
well one final question on that story um i may have missed something but uh this
is probably just a plot device but did you the breeding of the two different
races how that could be possible oh genetically no it couldn't it was as i said
uh response to one of earlier things that i intentionally was writing this in
the way as a tribute to the uh earlier view of Mars in The Pulp magazines where
this sort of thing was possible. And that was purely the introduction of an
outworn convention as a plot device.
I just assumed the reader would – I cannot consider that story science fiction.
I mean, it is fantasy, really, in that sense. But no, I am aware of the genetic
impossibility of the situation in the first place. Unless the racism had a
common origin or something. But I did it anyway.